#  Gene Differentiation by Machine Learning

This is a machine learning program to classify gene functions.  It is still under development, and this document provides both an overview of what the project will be when complete, and a list of possible next steps/questions.

## Overview

The modeltakes two lists of genes with some distinguishing characteristic, uses machine learning to categorize the difference between them, and then parses through a new unidentified gene set making predictions about which category genes belong to.   When complete the tool will be able to identify patterns in the data too complicated for humans to parse, and use them to identify potential functions in unidentified genes.

### Algorithms

Functionality may be implemented for the following machine learning alrogithms:

* Hidden markov models (HMM)
* Random forest trees
* k-means clustering
* neural nets

## Running Instructions

### Building the Model:

Run the following on the comand line, with both gene set files and the script in the current working directory:
```
./buildWoolf <GeneSet_1> <GeneSet_2> <outputFile>
```

Inputs:

* **GeneSet_1**: multi-sequence amino acid FASTA 
* **GeneSet_2**: multi-sequence amino acid FASTA 
* **outputFile**: file to which model parameters will be stored for use decoding another set of genes.

Note that GeneSet 1 and 2 files should contain genes from a similar class with one (or more? could that work?) distinct differences.

The output file outputFile will contain the parameters for classifying a new unknown set of genes.  See below for classifying specifications.

### Classifiying with a Woolf Model:

Run the following on the comand line, with the model file, the unknwon gene set file, and the script in the current working directory:
```
./runWoolf <modelFile> <GeneSet_Unknown>
```

Inputs:

* modelFile: model parameter file generated by a call to buildWoolf. 
* GeneSet_Unknown: multi-sequence amino acid FASTA 

Note that GeneSet_Unknown should contain genes of the same class as the genes used to build the model.

## Lab presentations and Thesis Committee Presentations

These presentations were given to either the VKC Lab durring lab meetings, or to my thesis committee.  They contain background information, and document my working progress.

* **[12/11/18 Thesis Committee Meeting](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1OZpYLSVLtJjkjRIWPzZq9Kgmf1haGQ5GKNgLEdJppfw/edit?usp=sharing)**: an overview of my fall semester work 
* **[12/3/18 Machine Algorithm Research ](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1vzqHAOpl8-pdivN2k4VXTbsyU1kNXPKU85aiaMWQXeM/edit?usp=sharing)**: algorithms under consideration presented in lab meeting
* **[11/5/18 Biological Background and Initial Project Plan](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1WPKPLAls7jK-ASeTeBcvSeus5B9hmag5wgbUsmXXgLU/edit?usp=sharing)**: the biological introduction to the project
* **[10/2/18 Initial Project Proposals](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1i0C0qMyz5Mk9t9Hvk8EW0eZWVZhmnl1Se-tbBJAQS3I/edit?usp=sharing)**: the inial ideas for this project and other potential theses


## References

See [references.txt](https://github.com/afarrellsherman/Woolf/blob/master/references.txt)